Mikey Spurr and Jahlia Finney

Group 1: Diagnosing Genetic Diseases

1: A genetic disorder/ disease is a genetic trait that is hereditary/ passed down from generations. 
	-Monogenetic Disorder: These are caused by a mutation in a single gene. The mutation may be present on one or both chromosomes. 
	-Multifactorial Inheritance Disorders: These are caused by a combination of small inherited variations in genes. 
	-Chromosome Disorders: These are caused by an excess or deficiency of the genes that are located on chromosomes or by structural changes within chromosomes.

2: Cystic Fibrosis: This genetic disorder causes mucus to build up in their lungs and sinuses, effects their digestive process due to lack of needed enzymes, and are infertile but are not sterile (Men at/around 97%, and women at/ around 20%).
Another disorder would be Huntington's Disease. This disease effects mood and mental abilities. People with this disease may start at different points but will eventually reach the same conclusion. This conclusion is uncoordination to the point where one is no longer able to talk, and that their mental abilities will generally decline and become dementia (Men and women are affected equally).

3: Genetic disorders were previously diagnosed by looking at one family tree to see if the symptoms have happened before or by looking at physical traits. 

4: Newborn Screening, Diagnostic testing, Carrier testing, Prenatal testing, Preimplantation testing, predictive and presymptomatic testing, and Forensic testing. All of these types of testing have come from our recent ability to sequence and analyze human genomes for a diagnosis. 

5: An example of how bioinformatics has been used to diagnose a genetic disorder would be Newborn Screening.
	-Newborn Screening is the practice of testing every newborn for certain harmful or potentially fatal disorders that aren't otherwise apparent at birth. The only requirements to perform this test is a couple drops of the newborn's blood and two simple hearing tests. These tests happen shortly after 24 hours of the baby being born. The nurse will draw blood from the baby's heel and then send the blood to go get analyzed. Next, the nurse would perform two simple hearing tests. First, the otoacoustic emissions test. For this test there are sensors placed on the baby's head to detect the brain's response to sound. If the baby's brain does not respond consistently to the sounds, there may be a hearing problem. Second, is the auditory brainstem response. This test is performed by using a machine called a pulse oximeter, using a painless sensor placed on the baby's skin. Most babies with serious but treatable conditions found by Newborn Screening grow up HEALTHY.

6: Some challenges facing the use of bioinformatics to diagnose genetic disorders would be whether or not the data is available yet, the ability to trace back through generations, mutations, ethics, and going through the long process to be able to work with/ on people.

7: Bioinformatics is the process by which we diagnose genetic disorders/ diseases.

8: There are three major disorders that are only caused by genetic mutations or variations.
